---
layout: post
title: Beyond Object-Oriented programming
---

Object-oriented programming (OOP) is like C. It feel old and out of fashion. People tend to abuse it's features, but
at the end everybody still relies on it one way of another.

In this (highly opinionated) take on OOP, I would like to revisit some of the strength of OOP, and how it translate into
modern development practices. I will then introduce other programming styles that are variations and revisits of OOP, 
just like modern languages did for C.

## Object-oriented vs functional programming

We tend to split programming paradigms into two families: imperative vs functional. OOP belongs to the first family and
has been in the industry since a long time. Java has been popular since the early 2000's and nearly all languages
develop at that time had an object component. C++, C#, even Python, used these days in machine-learning and big-data,
are either fully OOP or have an OOP component.

Functional programming (FP) popularity took off later. I'm not sure if it is related to the raise of Javascript and web
frameworks or due to technical improvements that made functional programming more efficient [^1] but functional
programming is now part of developer's life. With modern multi-core CPU architectures or inside distributed systems,
having a focus on state, mutation is a clear advantage for FP.

This (apparent) superiority seems to even force pure OOP language to adopt FP patterns, like the inclusion of streams
in Java 8.

## The demise of OOP ?

What is OOP ? It is usually defined with 3 characteristic properties

- classes and objects, that *encapsulates* states
- inheritance, that allows similar classes to share behavior
- polymorphism, that allows defining shared behaviors for objects with the same type

For it's detractors [^2], these properties are weak and are the cause of bugs and bad code. Encapsulated states are a 
source of complexity as mutation and side effects are not controlled. This can be a source of headaches when concurrency 
is involved. Inheritance trees are often a mess, leading to behaviors being scattered in an inheritance tree. 

In contrary, with FP, side effects are controlled, states doesn't exist, and the functions are the sole places to 
describe behaviors. Plus, functions can be composed freely, leading to a declarative way of expressing behaviors.

## Those things that stuck

- Values
- Level of abstraction
- FP and OOP, choose two

## Deconstructing OOP by the book






You might found out that polymorphism is not often quoted as a weakness of OOP. Commentators might argue that
polymorphism and inheritance are the same thing, as polymorphism is enabled by inheritance.


-----

[^1]: [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_programming#Efficiency_issues](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_programming#Efficiency_issues)

[^2]: For example [https://dpc.pw/the-faster-you-unlearn-oop-the-better-for-you-and-your-software](https://dpc.pw/the-faster-you-unlearn-oop-the-better-for-you-and-your-software)
      and [https://medium.com/@cscalfani/goodbye-object-oriented-programming-a59cda4c0e53](https://medium.com/@cscalfani/goodbye-object-oriented-programming-a59cda4c0e53)